JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
President-elect
Donald Trump taps some of his
biggest supporters
to shape his Cabinet -- a look
at those he
picked for these top roles,
including his
choice for attorney general,
Senator Jeff
Sessions.
Plus: what it means to be an
immigrant in
Donald Trump's America -- a look
at how life
could change for millions.
DIANA CHACON, College Student: I
was 11 years
old when I immigrated to the
United States.
I didn't know what being
undocumented was.
I didn't even know that a piece
of paper can
actually determine my whole
future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
David Brooks and Ruth Marcus
analyze the first
week of the Donald Trump
transition.
Finally, our "NewsHour" family
shares memories
of Gwen Ifill and the lessons
she taught us.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Trump
transition is accelerating
this evening.
The president-elect announced
his choices
for three top positions today.
They are Republican Senator Jeff
Sessions
of Alabama for attorney general,
retired Army
Lieutenant General Michael Flynn
for national
security adviser, and U.S.
Representative
Mike Pompeo, Republican of
Kansas, for director
of the CIA.
We will take a closer look at
all three men
after the news summary.
Separately, the president-elect
has reached
an agreement to resolve three
lawsuits over
his Trump University.
New York state's attorney
general announced
the $25 million settlement
today.
Mr. Trump's lawyers have squared
off with
students who say the for-profit
school failed
to deliver the real estate
investing education
that it promised.
The U.S. Justice Department has
begun looking
into charges of harassment and
intimidation
since the election and whether
they constitute
federal hate crimes.
There've been incidents
targeting Muslims
and blacks, including in schools
and churches.
Attorney General Loretta Lynch
spoke about
the situation in a video
statement today.
LORETTA LYNCH, U.S. Attorney
General: We need
you to continue to report these
incidents
to local law enforcement, as
well as the Justice
Department, so that our career
investigators
and prosecutors can take action
to defend
your rights.
We will continue to enforce our
nation's hate
crimes laws to the fullest
extent possible.
We will continue to uphold our
conviction
that all men and women deserve
to lead lives
of safety and dignity.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lynch pointed to
a new FBI
report showing a 67 percent
increase in hate
crimes against Muslims in 2015.
She called it deeply sobering.
There's been a surge of migrant
deaths in
the Mediterranean this week.
The U.N.'s International
Organization for
Migration said today that 365
people have
been lost trying to make the
crossing from
Libya to Italy.
Hundreds of others have been
rescued, after
at least six incidents, mostly
involving flimsy
rubber rafts.
U.N. officials call it a
calamity in plain
sight.
For the year, more than 4,600
have died, up
sharply from last year.
The World Health Organization
has declared
the Zika virus is no longer an
international
emergency.
But it said it was still working
on containing
the virus, calling it a
long-term problem.
The CDC urged pregnant women to
continue to
avoid traveling to areas with
local Zika transmission.
The legendary Texas heart
surgeon Dr. Denton
Cooley has died.
Cooley performed the first
successful human
heart transplant in the United
States in 1968.
And he implanted the world's
first artificial
heart a year later.
In all, Cooley performed some
65,000 open-heart
surgeries over four decades.
Denton Cooley was 96 years old.
In economic news: Volkswagen
announced plans
to cut 30,000 jobs worldwide, as
it tries
to recover from an emissions
cheating scandal;
23,000 of the jobs will be in
Germany.
Volkswagen says it expects to
save more than
$4 billion in the restructuring.
The company also said it's
adding 9,000 jobs
to work on electric-powered
cars.
Stocks closed lower on Wall
Street today,
led by losses in the health care
sector.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost nearly
36 points to close under 18868.
The Nasdaq fell 12, and the S&P
500 slipped
five.
For the week, the Dow gained a
faction of
a percent, and both the Nasdaq
and the S&P
500 rose around 1 percent.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
more on the
president-elect's newest
appointments and
how they may shape domestic and
foreign policies;
reflections on possible changes
in immigration
enforcement; we examine an
aspect of the Trump
agenda; and much more.
And now for our in-depth look at
president-elect
Trump's latest picks for his top
jobs in his
administration.
We start with Senator Jeff
Sessions, one of
the most conservative U.S.
lawmakers, and
potentially the nation's next
top law enforcement
official.
John Yang begins.
JOHN YANG: Nine months ago, Jeff
Sessions
became the first senator to back
candidate
Donald Trump.
SEN.
JEFF SESSIONS (R), Alabama: I am
pleased to
endorse Donald Trump for the
presidency of
the United States.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: Today,
president-elect Trump picked
him to be attorney general.
Jefferson Beauregard Sessions
III was first
elected to the Senate in 1996,
and is known
to have good relations across
party lines.
In the 1980s, as a
Reagan-appointed U.S. attorney
in Alabama, he had made his name
as a tough,
aggressive prosecutor.
In 1994, he was elected Alabama
attorney general.
In the Senate, Sessions became a
member of
the Judiciary Committee, the
same panel that
rejected his nomination to be a
federal judge
in 1986 over accusations he had
made racially
insensitive comments.
SEN.
JEFF SESSIONS: I am not a
racist.
I am not insensitive to blacks.
JOHN YANG: Sessions denied
making some of
the comments and said others
were taken out
of context.
He's been a leading voice
against illegal
immigration.
In 2007, he dealt President
George W. Bush
a painful blow, helping defeat a
bipartisan
bill that would have created a
guest-worker
program for undocumented
immigrants.
SEN.
JEFF SESSIONS: You have got to
have this amnesty.
You have got to give up, and we
will have
amnesty.
And in exchange for that, you
guys, we will
have a legal system that will
work in the
future.
But it won't work.
JOHN YANG: Last year, he opposed
the nomination
of Loretta Lynch, whom he would
replace as
attorney general, over her
support for President
Obama's executive orders on
immigration.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For more on the
president-elect's
pick for attorney general, we
are joined by
Carrie Johnson.
She is the justice correspondent
for NPR.
Carrie, welcome back to the
program.
CARRIE JOHNSON, NPR: Thank you,
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what is
Senator Jeff Sessions'
reputation in Washington?
CARRIE JOHNSON: He's a
69-year-old senator.
He's been a member of the Senate
for more
than -- about 20 years now,
Judy.
And he's pretty well-liked
across the aisle.
He also has a significant law
enforcement
background, serving as U.S.
attorney in Alabama
for about 15 years earlier in
his career.
But he's very tough on
immigration, as your
setup piece mentioned, and
pretty tough as
well on law and order, the kind
of message
we have been hearing from Donald
Trump on
the campaign trail.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, fill out the
picture a
little.
Who are some of the groups who
are saying
nice things about him, who
support him?
CARRIE JOHNSON: The Heritage
Foundation, very
conservative think tanks here in
Washington,
and people who oppose
immigration and opening
up the immigration system.
On the other hand -- and also
Donald Trump's
team, I should say that they
point out that
he has been a close ally of
president-elect
Trump for a long time, and they
call him a
great legal mind.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And he is -- as
we should point
out, and I think we have, he was
is first
U.S. senator to come out for
Donald Trump.
But talk about now some of the
groups, civil
rights organizations,
pro-immigration reform
groups that have come out
against him.
What are they saying?
CARRIE JOHNSON: So, the NAACP
Legal Defense
Fund, the ACLU all have come out
and said
that this is a very inflammatory
pick at a
time when racial tensions are
already high
in the country because of
police-involved
shootings of unarmed
African-Americans, that
to pick somebody with this
record of making
racially insensitive statements
is going backward,
not moving forward.
Also, Judy, the Human Rights
Campaign, the
biggest LGBT advocacy in the
country, has
given him a zero for his voting
rights record
on those issues in the Senate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Carrie, how
unusual was it
for the Senate to reject his
nomination to
the federal -- there was a
federal court appointment
back in 1986, 30 years ago.
He was rejected for that.
How unusual was that?
CARRIE JOHNSON: Breathtaking.
As you know more than anyone,
the Senate usually
takes care of its own.
And it has a strong record of
backing picks
from the president.
This was a Republican-controlled
Senate Judiciary
Committee that voted him down.
The irony is, Jeff Sessions now
sat on that
committee, including as its top
Republican.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about since
then?
He's -- over the years, he's had
time.
He served in public life.
He went on to serve in the
United States for,
what, almost 20 years.
What has he done?
How has he voted that would help
us understand
what his position is today on
civil rights?
CARRIE JOHNSON: Well, the Trump
team today
on a call with reporters pointed
out that
he helped sponsor a
congressional medal for
civil rights hero Rosa Parks.
They point out he did vote in
favor of Attorney
General Eric Holder under
President Obama,
the first black man to serve as
the nation's
top law enforcement officer.
And they say he has voted to
authorize the
Voting Rights Act in the past.
However, civil rights groups
would tell you
what, when the Supreme Court, in
their view,
gutted the act three years ago,
Jeff Sessions
celebrated that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What is the worry
in the civil
rights community about him?
CARRIE JOHNSON: The worry is
that the voice
of the Justice Department over
the last eight
years in trying to calm the
nerves of the
country and very aggressively
investigate
police departments for excessive
force and
racial discrimination, the worry
is, under
Jeff Sessions, the Justice
Department Civil
Rights Division would stop doing
that work,
it would stop doing work to
protect voters,
and instead perhaps focus on
disability cases,
religious freedom cases and the
like, and
move away from what their view
is as the center
of the lane for civil rights in
this country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Carrie, what
about with
regard to immigration?
What's the concern there on the
part of the
immigration reform people?
CARRIE JOHNSON: So, Donald Trump
and Jeff
Sessions have both been
anti-immigration for
a long time.
The difference is, the White
House and the
attorney general have a lot of
power in this
regard.
And if Donald Trump gets his way
and Jeff
Sessions is confirmed, Jeff
Sessions will
control the immigration courts
in this country,
which hear deportation
proceedings, decide
whether people can be granted
asylum and whether
they have to remain detained
while their cases
are pending.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You have said
several times
the president and the attorney
general have
the power without the
involvement of Congress
to undo, to make a lot of
decisions that potentially
could undo what we have seen
coming out of
this administration.
Is there a speculation about
what could happen
quickly in this administration,
the new administration?
CARRIE JOHNSON: Yes, absolutely.
Among the things, Judy, that
civil rights
groups are talking about now is
sort of assertive
interpretation of laws that the
Justice Department
and the Education Department in
this administration
use to extend protections to
transgender students
in schools.
That could be wiped away with
the change of
power in the White House and the
Justice Department.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you mentioned
it with regard
to civil rights.
And I think we were talking to
you also about
with regard to police use of
force and the
steps that have been taken by
this administration
to work with police departments
to do more
community policing, for example.
CARRIE JOHNSON: Well, my sense
is that Senator
Sessions and president-elect
Trump will want
to partners with local police,
not overseers
or investigators of them.
And that means some of these
investigations
and potentially some criminal
charges go away
in the federal system.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Carrie Johnson,
justice correspondent
for NPR, thank you so much.
CARRIE JOHNSON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we turn now
to the other
major appointments Donald Trump
made today.
Again, John Yang brings us some
background.
JOHN YANG: It's a plum job for
an ardent loyalist.
Michael Flynn was one of the
highest ranking
former military officers to
endorse candidate
Donald Trump.
The retired army lieutenant
general was outspoken
in condemning Hillary Clinton.
LT.
GEN.
MICHAEL FLYNN (RET.), National
Security Adviser-Designee:
We do not need a reckless
president who believes
she is above the law.
AUDIENCE: Lock her up! Lock her
up!
LT.
GEN.
MICHAEL FLYNN: Lock her up,
that's right.
Yes, that's right.
Lock her up.
JOHN YANG: He held a variety of
senior posts
during the Afghan war and became
the top U.S.
military intelligence officer
there.
In 2012, he became the head of
the Defense
Intelligence Agency, only to be
forced out
two years later, amid reports
he'd been fired
over his combative style,
reports he disputed.
After that, Flynn became hotly
critical of
the Obama administration's
pursuit of Islamic
radicals.
Last February, he went even
further, tweeting
that: "Fear of Muslims is
rational."
Meanwhile, Republican
Congressman Mike Pompeo
of Kansas is president-elect
Trump's choice
to be CIA director.
A graduate of West Point and
Harvard Law School,
he was elected to the House in
2010.
He gained prominence as a sharp
Clinton critic
on the House Select Committee on
Benghazi.
And he's an opponent of the Iran
nuclear deal.
In addition, Pompeo has said
that Muslim leaders
who don't denounce terror
attacks are potentially
complicit.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We look now at
the choices
with Democratic Congressman Adam
Schiff of
California, the ranking member
of the House
Permanent Select Committee on
Intelligence,
and Michael Ledeen, a scholar at
the Foundation
for Defense of Democracies, a
nonprofit organization
here in Washington.
He's also co-author with retired
General Michael
Flynn of the book "The Field of
Fight: How
We Can Win the Global War
Against Radical
Islam and Its Allies."
And we welcome both of you back
to the program.
Thank you for being here.
Michael Ledeen, you wrote that
book together
with General Flynn.
You know him very well.
What do you think of this pick?
MICHAEL LEDEEN, Foundation for
Defense of
Democracies: I think it's a
great pick.
He has various qualities that
you really want
in that job.
Number one, he's very
straightforward.
He's not tricky.
He's not guileful.
He's not afraid to give bad news
to his superiors.
He's proven that.
And, secondly, really, it's
unusual for a
military man.
He doesn't care about rank.
His career is, if he finds some
2nd lieutenant
who's good at something, he will
stick with
that guy, rather than look for
some full colonel
or something.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman
Schiff, what's
your thought on Michael Flynn
for the national
security adviser?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF (D), California:
Profoundly concerned,
both for reasons of temperament,
as well as
his view on a number of key
policy issues.
Chief among them, he's made some
very incendiary
remarks about the entire
religion of Islam,
at times failing to distinguish
between the
practitioners of that faith and
al-Qaida and
ISIS.
That's a narrative that ISIS
likes to play
into, that there is a clash of
civilization,
that it's the West against all
of Islam.
And, unfortunately, a lot of
things that General
Flynn has said over the years
play into that
narrative.
I'm also concerned, though, that
you have
someone with a temperament that,
when he was
running the Defense Intelligence
Agency, was
volatile, was often erratic.
He had severe management
problems.
We need a steady hand in the
national security
adviser.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Michael Ledeen,
let's take
those one at a time.
Temperament.
Does General Flynn have the
temperament necessary
to be in this job, national
security adviser,
where you have to weigh so many
different
competing interests?
MICHAEL LEDEEN: Well, I think
so.
I mean, he totally transformed
the way we
do intelligence on the
battlefield, first
in Iraq, then in Afghanistan.
Those were big organizations.
The methods that he inherited
had been in
place for a long time, and he
transformed
them.
As for Islam, if you will read
the book "The
Field of Fight," you will find
that he doesn't
condemn Islam in its entirety,
that he condemns
radical Muslims, that he has a
lot of supportive
words both for groups,
individuals and countries
that are moderately Islamic,
like Indonesia,
like Singapore and so forth.
And he goes on at great length
about that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's
unpack those one
at a time.
Congressman Schiff, let's pick
up on the comment
you made that he had made
remarks about Islam,
essentially saying the entire
religion is
what we need to worry about.
But we hear Michael Ledeen
saying that's just
not the case.
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: Well, Michael must
have written
those chapters in the book that
express a
different view, because, if you
look at what
comes directly from General
Flynn in his tweets
and other comments, that we
should rationally
fear all Muslims, that -- those
are very damaging
statements.
And I think, coupled with a
president-elect
who has talked about banning all
Muslims,
this is deeply destructive to
the country,
to our work with our Muslim
allies, and plays
into this narrative that
al-Qaida wants to
tell that it's us or them, that
Muslims don't
have a home in the West.
But, beyond that, if you look at
his coziness
with the Kremlin, he shares that
with the
president-elect.
Putin is not our friend.
And I want someone, a national
security adviser
who's willing to tell the
president, notwithstanding
your predisposition to want to
get along with
this guy, he is invading his
neighbors, he
is bombing civilians in Syria,
and he is not
your friend.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, coziness
with the Kremlin,
coziness with Vladimir Putin,
Michael Ledeen,
what is the truth of that?
What is the story?
I mean, how close is he to the
Russians?
We know he gave a speech, was
paid by a Russian
entity for that.
MICHAEL LEDEEN: Well, he was
brought to a
conference.
It's normal, if you go to a
conference, that
your expenses get covered.
They hired him through a
speakers bureau,
so he got a normal speaking fee.
I mean, there's nothing untoward
about that.
And to his face, he called Putin
an enemy.
So, all this talk about Flynn
being soft on
the Kremlin and so forth is
nonsense.
And the people who say it -- I'm
sorry to
say it hurts me personally --
haven't read
the book, because the book calls
Putin an
enemy of the United States, in
those words.
So, this is, to my way of
thinking, just a
misunderstanding of Flynn, as
the Muslim thing
is a misunderstanding.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Short answer.
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: Well,
notwithstanding the book,
that's not the way General Flynn
has been
talking during the last year.
And, in fact, when General Flynn
was asked,
as indeed the president-elect
was asked, about
Russians hacking into Democratic
institutions,
something the director of
national intelligence
has confirmed was ordered at the
highest levels
of the Kremlin, both the
president-elect,
with the support of General
Flynn, basically
disavowed that intelligence and
said, we don't
really know, it could be Russia,
could be
China, could be a 400-pound man.
If General Flynn is willing to
disregard good
intelligence when it's counter
to the interests,
political interests of the
president-elect,
that is a real problem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, we
need to move
on in a little bit of time left
to talk Congressman
Mike Pompeo, chosen to be in
charge of the
CIA.
Michael Ledeen, do you know him
well?
What do you think of him?
MICHAEL LEDEEN: Kansas.
He's what we used to call a real
American.
He's heartland.
He's very smart.
He's extremely hardworking.
He's been terrific on Iran.
He and Senator...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Terrific on Iran,
meaning -- we
know that he's been very
critical of the Iran
nuclear deal.
MICHAEL LEDEEN: Well, but he's
one of the
members of Congress that
uncovered the Iranian
cheating and some of the secret
deals that
were made that Congress hadn't
been told about.
They uncovered that in Vienna at
IAEA.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What is your
comment on him?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: I know Mike very
well and I like
him.
I think he's a very bright guy,
a very hardworking
guy.
And I think he will do a good
job at the CIA.
He can be very partisan.
And, on Benghazi, we had very
strong differences.
He was even beyond the point
where the majority
of -- the majority was, and
issued a separate
opinion, not thinking the
majority opinion
was harsh enough on the
secretary.
So, he can be very partisan.
But, at the same time, I am
confident that
he will set that aside.
He will have to.
The CIA requires somebody to be
just vehemently
apolitical, nonpartisan.
But I think he has the
capability of doing
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we will be
learning much
more about these two gentlemen
in the days
and weeks to come.
Right now, we want to thank both
of you, Congressman
Adam Schiff, Michael Ledeen.
Thank you.
MICHAEL LEDEEN: Thank you.
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
And, online, we take a closer
look at the
relationship between Trump chief
strategist
Stephen Bannon and the
controversial media
outlet Breitbart News.
Stephen Bannon and the
controversial media
outlet Breitbart News.
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
David Brooks
and Ruth Marcus take on the
week's news; and
a personal "NewsHour" tribute to
Gwen Ifill.
But first: our coverage of the
agenda of president-elect
Trump and the potential impact
of some big
changes.
One of the major themes of his
campaign was
cracking down on immigration,
not just of
those who are undocumented, but
also hundreds
of thousands of people who've
obtained temporary
legal status during the Obama
years.
Now those young adults are
uncertain and anxious
about what's to come.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
I was 11 years old when I
immigrated to the
United States.
I didn't know what being
undocumented was.
I didn't even know that a piece
of paper can
actually determine my whole
future.
DIANA CHACON, College Student: I
thought that
working really hard throughout
high school
would give me the same
opportunities that
most have, ones that graduated.
Like, you can go apply to any
college you
want, go study upstate.
JEFFREY BROWN:
Twenty-one-year-old Diana Chacon
has come a long way from her
birth in Lima,
Peru.
She's now a student at the John
Jay College
of Criminal Justice in New York.
But her path forward could get
much tougher.
Chacon is a recipient of DACA,
Deferred Action
for Childhood Arrivals, an Obama
administration
policy that allows undocumented
immigrants
who entered the country as
children to work
and study here legally on a
temporary basis.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
If there is a young person here
who has grown
up here and wants to contribute
to this society,
wants to maybe start a business
that will
create jobs for other folks who
are looking
for work, that's the right thing
to do.
DIANA CHACON: DACA changed my
life.
It allowed me to be involved in
school more,
spend more time doing my class
work assignments,
spend more time applying for
programs, and
just get involved in my
community in general.
I stopped making excuses for who
I was and
what position I was in.
I was so encouraged to keep
going.
I was encouraged to pursue law
school.
I knew that all the things I
have been doing
to this point were projecting me
into a better
future, into a better life.
And all of that's going to
change because,
you know, now Donald Trump is
president.
BARACK OBAMA: This is a
temporary stopgap
measure.
JEFFREY BROWN: Unable to get
immigration legislation
passed, President Obama used his
executive
power to create DACA.
Now, just as easily, it could be
undone, with
enormous potential consequences
for Chacon
and the 800,000 other recipients
known as
dreamers.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: Anyone
who has entered the United
States illegally
is subject to deportation.
That is what it means to have
laws and to
have a country.
JEFFREY BROWN: In addition to
building a wall,
Donald Trump as a candidate made
the repeal
of DACA a top priority.
And since the election, dreamers
and other
immigrants have protested across
the country.
Teresa Galindo, who brought her
two sons to
the U.S. from Mexico after her
husband's death,
marched at a Sunday Midtown
Manhattan rally.
Her youngest, Carlos, now 31,
was just 2 years
old when he entered the country.
TERESA GALINDO, Undocumented
Mother (through
translator): It wasn't their
fault and it's
still not their fault.
They're here because I brought
them when they
were very young.
I did it as a mother to give my
kids the best.
I wanted to, and I still want to
give them
the best.
Back in my country, they
couldn't even get
an education.
JEFFREY BROWN: Carlos got his
education, and
four years ago became a DACA
recipient.
He now works at an immigrants
rights organization
in Staten Island helping others
find legal
and other resources.
His own uncertain future, he
says, now informs
his work and activism.
So, if DACA is repealed, what
would happen?
CARLOS VARGAS, Immigrant
Activist: I don't
know.
And that's the scary part.
It's a little bit frightening.
But we're going to fight.
Right?
If they do take it away, we
demand something
better.
JEFFREY BROWN: But what does
that mean?
I mean, what would you do?
CARLOS VARGAS: Go out.
The dreamer movement has been
alive since
2001.
DACA wasn't given to us because
the president
woke up one day and said, I
really feel for
you youth.
I'm going to give you DACA.
We fought for it.
There was a lot of civil
disobedience.
There was a lot of organizing.
And I think that just means
we're going to
do that to a bigger scale now.
JEFFREY BROWN: Staten Island is
home to a
fast-growing immigrant
community, many, like
Vargas, from Mexico.
It's also the only one of New
York's five
boroughs to vote for Donald
Trump.
And it's not hard to find Trump
supporters
like Sebastian Demetrio, a
78-year-old veteran,
bagel shop worker and himself an
immigrant
from Eastern Europe.
SEBASTIAN DEMETRIO, Trump
Supporter: I came
here legal.
My father was working here.
I came as a legal immigrant.
A lot of people are sneaking up
in this country.
They're taking our jobs.
And I think we need a change.
Take care of your own people
first before
you take care of the other
people that don't
belong in this country.
JEFFREY BROWN: Staten Island
City Councilman
Joe Borelli served as a
co-chairman for the
Trump campaign here in New York.
JOSEPH BORELLI, Co-Chair, Donald
Trump New
York Campaign: It's the
sentiment that we
ought to be a nation of laws.
You know, Staten Island is a
place where many
immigrants come to.
Of course, New York is broadly
the home of
immigration to this country.
The majority of people who come
to New York
as immigrants come here through
a legal process,
just like many people's
ancestors did through
Ellis Island.
Fifty percent of our small
businesses here
in New York City are owned by
immigrants or
people of color or some
combination thereof.
They are making New York great.
And they are making America
great.
As long as you follow the rules,
you should
be welcome here.
JEFFREY BROWN: His message to
constituents
fearing deportation now?
JOSEPH BORELLI: I would tell
these people
to relax slightly.
And I understand it's
concerning.
But they should wait to see what
the administration
puts forth.
DONALD TRUMP: We're getting them
out of our
country.
They're here illegally.
JEFFREY BROWN: In his first
televised interview
as president-elect, Mr. Trump
pledged to focus
first on deporting immigrants
with criminal
records.
He's yet to clarify his position
on DACA.
Diana Chacon has no criminal
record, but she's
hardly comforted.
DIANA CHACON: When you're
deporting one undocumented
person, you're basically
deporting everybody
else with that person, not
physically, but
emotionally.
Like, it's that baggage that's
left behind.
It's not just me, just not you.
It's everybody who is going to
be affected
indirectly.
And separating families,
separating friendships,
separating communities, in my
eyes, it's a
form of violence.
JEFFREY BROWN: For now, she
remains focused
on her future.
DIANA CHACON: I don't want to
think that because
my life is in somebody else's
hands at the
moment means that I don't have
control over
it anymore.
I am so much more than the
narratives that
are out there about me, about my
community.
You know that's something you
can't control.
But what I can control is how
I'm going to
go about it and how I'm going to
take the
few next steps.
I'm not going to let one piece
of paper define
me.
I'm not going to let a president
define me.
I can't.
JEFFREY BROWN: From New York,
I'm Jeffrey
Brown for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now to the
analysis of
Brooks and Marcus.
That's New York Times columnist
David Brooks
and Washington Post columnist
Ruth Marcus.
Mark Shields is away.
And happy Friday to both of you.
So, president-elect Trump,
David, making these
three big announcements today in
the national
security arena, after we heard
who a couple
of people are going to be around
him in the
White House.
What do we make of these
choices, starting
with the ones today?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, if you
thought Donald
Trump was going to be swallowed
up by the
conventional Republican Party or
by Washington,
you were wrong.
He's governing exactly, it
seems, as he campaigned.
And the people he selected are
very much in
the spirit of the campaign,
sometimes explicitly
referencing the policies he took
on the campaign.
So, I would say, A, they are
going to be very
different.
We're going to have a very
different administration
from a normal Republican
administration, let
alone a Democratic
administration.
Second, I have to say, they have
good resumes.
Pompeo, Flynn, they are -- it's
not like they're
just out of the wilderness.
These are people who have been
around power
and who probably are not going
to be automatically
incompetent at their jobs.
The third thing to that we say
is, they have
Donald Trump's charm, which is
to say they
are extremely sharp-elbowed
individuals, to
a person.
And it's like he's taken all the
hard bosses
or bad bosses in the world and
so far he is
bringing them all together.
And so, if they work as a team,
maybe they
will be a very tough team, but
they could
work on each other.
And it could be hard to hire
people under
them, because these are people
famous for
being really hard on those
around them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ruth, what do you
make of these
national security picks?
RUTH MARCUS: Disturbing on
General Flynn,
and less disturbing on
Congressman Pompeo.
I think it's really important
for us to understand
Donald Trump is the
president-elect, and he
is really entitled to -- he has
got the prerogative
to pick people who will
implement his policies
and who have his confidence.
But I think -- I don't look at
it just as
the national security team.
I look at it as a whole, and I'm
very worried
that he is picking people -- he
talked on
election night about the need to
bind the
wounds of division.
I think he's picking a series of
people who
are potentially pouring salt
into the wounds
of division and who are
reinforcing some of
his worst tendencies, rather
than buttressing
him and surrounding himself with
people who
bring to the table both
personality and capabilities
that he may be lacking in.
And so I would -- the three that
most concern
me are General Flynn, Senator
Sessions, and
Steve Bannon at his right hand
in the White
House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Who comes from
Breitbart News.
RUTH MARCUS: Indeed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which raises -- I
saw some
commentary, David, saying, well,
maybe there
is good cop/bad cop thing going
on here in
the White House, where Donald
Trump picks
Reince Priebus, the chairman of
the Republican
Party, as his chief of staff,
but then he
picks Bannon, Steve Bannon, to
be his counselor.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I'm not yet
putting Priebus
in my good cop category...
(CROSSTALK)
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: ... bad and other
cops.
Bannon is the interesting case.
He is, of course -- I do not
approve of his
news organization or his
judgments, but he
is something out of a different
-- he is a
pure populist, pure
anti-establishment.
And so, for example, there was
an article
today, a rare interview that he
gave, where
he really talked about having a
trillion-dollar
infrastructure program.
That would be a big shift in our
national
debate.
And I think it might be a good
idea.
But it would get a lot of
Democrats on board.
And I do think the silver lining
for those
of you who didn't approve of
Donald Trump
is that there are a lot of
policies in his
canon that do mess with our
categories.
And that kind of big spending
program would
be one of them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you
think?
RUTH MARCUS: I'm kind of having
a hard time
seeing the Steve Bannon silver
lining here,
even with a big infrastructure
program, because
his Web site and his own history
has been
so divisive, so hurtful to
people of -- minorities,
people of other faiths.
I think having somebody like
that in the White
House -- I understand, to the
victor go the
spoils, but bringing someone
like that inside
the White House who you're going
to be listening
to is a bad thing.
And then we're layering on to
that I think
two people who are the wrong
people in the
wrong jobs.
You want somebody who is going
to be your
national security adviser who is
going to
be temperate, who is going to be
an honest
broker, who is going to be able
to take in
information and give you sort
of, this is
what everybody is saying.
That is not, from the people
that I have spoken
to today, what General Flynn is
all about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: No.
RUTH MARCUS: And, similarly,
with Senator
Sessions, I was around for his
confirmation
hearings as judge.
JUDY WOODRUFF: No.
RUTH MARCUS: Both in those -- I
know.
I look so young.
(LAUGHTER)
RUTH MARCUS: But it's true.
Both in those and in his
performance as senator,
taking -- going to the Justice
Department,
sort of same idea.
If he were up for secretary of
defense, I
might not have this issue.
But we're at a country that is
facing enormous
racial tensions, really
difficult questions
about criminal justice reform
and tensions
between minority communities and
police, and
here he is with a long history.
Wrong person, wrong job.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How much of a
worry is that,
David?
DAVID BROOKS: I do think it is a
significant
worry.
I mean, this past few weeks,
past few months,
past few years, maybe past few
centuries,
have been rife with racial
tension.
And this seems set to exploit
that and to
exacerbate that.
I think that's going to be one
of the most
likely and one of the ugliest
features of
the campaign.
I'm trying -- as I said on the
program last
week, I'm trying to give a
pause.
The guy was elected.
And, as I say, he's been
extremely consistent
with his electoral campaign.
He's being authentic to what he
ran on and
what got elected.
And so I agree with Ruth.
I think these people deserve to
be confirmed.
There's nobody who, I don't
think, doesn't
deserve to be confirmed.
One other point, though, and
this is about
the Bannon point.
He's always had a teeny-tiny
circle of trust.
I can't imagine that being in
the Trump Cabinet
will be a very important job.
I do think this will be a White
House-run
administration with a teeny-tiny
group of
people surrounding him,
including his family
maybe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, and that's
-- I want
to ask about that, because one
thing everybody
noticed is that his family is on
the transition
team, his children, his
son-in-law, Ruth.
They were -- his daughter Ivanka
and her husband,
Jared Kushner, were in that
meeting yesterday
with the Japanese prime
minister.
Is this something -- I mean,
what?
What are we to make of this?
RUTH MARCUS: Well, again, quite
disturbing.
I do not begrudge anybody
relying on their
family members for advice.
I do.
Politicians regularly rely on
family members
for advice.
But Donald Trump is in a unique
position here.
First of all, he has told us
that he is going
to solve -- and I don't think
it's a good
solution -- his problems of
conflict of interests
in his business by turning over
the management
to his children.
OK, maybe that's adequate from
his point of
view.
But now he's simultaneously
turning over the
management to his children and
bringing in
his children, first three of
them, to the
transition, and then apparently
tapping his
son-in-law, married to one of
the people who's
going to be managing this
business and dealing
with the conflict that way, to
bring them
into the White House.
That's number one.
Number two, in this small
circle, you want
a president without governing
experience to
be surrounded by people with
experience in
governing.
Instead, it's insular Trump
surrounded by
his family.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does that bother
you?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, what does
bother me is
the intermingling of the
business and the
public service aspect of this.
And so I do agree with that.
But I do think, if the family
members choose
one side or the other, I would
have no problem
with Ivanka serving on the White
House staff,
frankly.
But there's a rule against it
now, in theory,
serving in the Cabinet, at
least, maybe not
in the White House, that was
passed after
Bobby Kennedy.
I personally think that's a dumb
rule.
If a president wants to have a
family member
as -- an executive of a small
business can
have a family member.
I don't have a problem with
that.
I actually think Ivanka would be
a good influence
on the administration.
But I do think as long as the --
he's so business-minded.
As long as we're constantly
asking, is he
trying to make a buck off this,
is he trying
to promote his hotel with this,
then that's
just a corruption of what we
think of as public
service.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
Well, I wanted to ask you both
about the Democrats
and where they stand right now,
back on their
heels.
But I really want to leave time
here at the
end for a few minutes to ask you
both about
our friend.
You both knew her well, Gwen.
David, you were close friends.
Ruth, you have worked with her
for so long.
Ruth, you go back to, what,
early days at
The Washington Post.
RUTH MARCUS: So, I can tell you
the exact
day, because it was my first day
at The Washington
Post, September 4, 1984.
I drove out to Prince George's
County, Upper
Marlboro, Maryland, walked into
the bureau,
and there was Gwen Ifill with
this luminous
smile that David wrote so
beautifully about.
And we have been friends ever
since.
I think -- thinking, she went to
The New York
Times, so we covered the White
House together.
And I'm particularly remembering
one Christmas
Eve in Little Rock in 1992 after
the Clinton
election.
I think Gwen's editor had sent
her a bottle
of champagne, which we had to
drink surreptitiously
out of teacups, because I think
the restaurant
was dry.
(LAUGHTER)
RUTH MARCUS: And then I have to
say finally
that it's actually thanks to
Gwen that I'm
sitting here tonight, because
Mark was going
to be away one day.
And Jim said, "Hey, who can --
how can we
broaden the circle and bring
people in?"
And Gwen said, "What about
Ruth?"
And I know I'm not only person
for whom she
went to bat and said, why don't
we expand
the field of people that we use?
And, so, I will miss her, and
I'm thankful
to her.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, she had an
eye for talent.
And we're glad you're here, too.
And, David, she was so fond of
you.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, and, well, I
wrote this
column.
And the way I ended it, which I
think is a
point that is a true one, is
that nobody reminded
you of her.
You never thought, oh, who's
kind of like
Gwen?
Who's the next best Gwen?
There is no next best Gwen.
And I think what was unique
about her was
this combination of intense
strength with
intense warmth.
And, you know, one of the
toughest hours of
TV I ever had, but maybe the
best, was on
"Meet the Press."
I did a show sometimes called
"Imus in the
Morning."
And Tim Russert did that show
and David Gregory.
And he said some racist things.
And I didn't realize he had
already said some
racist things about her.
And she was on the show, and she
just was
super tough on us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
I remember that.
DAVID BROOKS: But then the
intense warmth.
I have a photo on my phone of
you and Gwen
doing an exploding fist bump at
the convention.
And she's laughing and she's
dancing in her
chair, that warmth, that smile.
And the two were so in tandem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, our mutual
friend John
Dickerson over at CBS said you
could read
a book by the light of her
smile.
And I think we all agree with
that.
Ruth Marcus, David Brooks, we
thank you.
And, with that, before we go
tonight, we wanted
to let members of our own
"NewsHour" family,
past and present, on camera and
behind the
camera, pay tribute to Gwen.
As you know, she passed away
earlier this
week.
She will be remembered at
services this weekend
here in Washington.
Personally, I'm the luckiest
person I know
because I had the privilege of
being Gwen
Ifill's friend and her sidekick
at work.
She was like a magnet.
People just wanted to be close
to her because
she instinctively cared about
how they were
doing.
We joked.
We were like an old married
couple.
We weren't afraid to say the
really important
stuff to each other's faces,
like, you have
got salad in your teeth, or,
where did you
find those fabulous earrings?
As a work partner, she was the
ultimate, holding
me and everyone else here at the
"NewsHour"
to the highest standards.
Her mantra was, "Assume
nothing."
"How do you know?"
I can hear her asking.
Boy, do we miss her.
There is an empty place in our
hearts.
But we will carry on, as Gwen
would want,
with a commitment to being
thorough, being
fair and to shedding light,
rather than heat,
on everything we cover.
TRAVIS DAUB: What I learned from
Gwen as a
journalist is to never accept
the easy answer.
There is often another layer to
a problem.
There is often another
motivation driving
someone behind an issue.
And it's our job to find out
what that is.
JENNY MARDER: For every story,
you need to
think about, what is the
question that's important
to ask and why does it matter?
JOSHUA BARAJAS: No matter how
complicated
and how fraught the
conversations I have with
people, Gwen taught me how to
listen.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There is a
professional
ladder in this business, but, as
a journalist
of color, what she impressed
upon me, as a
friend and a mentor, is that
it's not just
enough to climb that ladder.
It's about making sure that you
pull someone
else up, and then they pull
someone else up
along the way.
JASMINE WRIGHT: It's no longer
an exception
to see a black woman who looks
just like me
anchoring the nightly news,
reporting on foreign
policy and politics, but that
it's the norm.
AMANDA GOMEZ: Race and gender
doesn't define
my reporting.
It adds to it.
It strengthens it.
KAMARIA ROBERTS: Determined and
focused, despite
what naysayers may have to say
about you and
your work.
WOMAN: Believe in wonder.
She taught me to be bold.
She taught me that black women
are magical.
JIM LEHRER: We heard that there
was an opportunity
for her to come possibly to PBS
to do "Washington
Week," but even possibly be a
correspondent
on the "NewsHour."
Linda Winslow, who was then the
executive
producer of the "NewsHour," and
I had dinner
with Gwen, and we talked about
her coming
aboard as a correspondent.
And almost right there, she
accepted.
And to our new senior
correspondent, Gwen
Ifill, welcome, Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: Thanks, Jim.
JIM LEHRER: And there she was,
one of us.
She was a superb professional,
somebody who
understood the need to be civil,
understand
the need to be honest, the need
to do your
homework, and the need to be
tough when required,
to be soft when required, and
more importantly,
always to be yourself, which
Gwen always was.
DAR SILVER: Gwen Ifill was a
class act.
Everybody who spent any time
with her, both
professionally and outside the
studio, was
aware of the fact that she was a
consummate
professional.
PAM KIRKLAND: Gwen taught me to
keep digging,
that, even when I thought all
the questions
had been answered in a story,
that there were
always more questions to ask.
LEAH NAGY: To always ask, so
what?
How does the story affect people
across the
country?
Why should they care?
JOE BUCKINGHAM: Was to always
remember the
importance of words, the right
words at the
right time.
MARGARET WARNER: We shared a
journalist's
passion for explaining to our
audience how
the world works, but with
honesty and care,
not cynicism.
Most precious of all was her
wise counsel,
reminding me in tough times to
rely on family,
friends and faith.
They were the greatest source of
Gwen's gusto
and joy.
JOHN YANG: Gwen taught me, in
the more than
30 years we knew each other, the
value and
the power of friendship.
DAN COONEY: What did I learn
from Gwen?
She reinforced in me the
difference a smile
can make in someone's day.
MIKE MELIA: Kindness and
curiosity are the
best tools that we have to love
and to live.
JIM SCHNEIDER: Live with
integrity and grace
all the time.
LINDA WINSLOW: When her strong,
compassionate
heart stopped beating on Monday,
those of
us who knew and loved her, her
friends and
her colleagues and the audience
as well, knew
that our own hearts had taken a
direct hit.
She was our inspiration.
She was the person who told us
that the work
we did really mattered.
She was a stickler for accuracy,
and she was
also a fun-loving,
life-affirming, deeply
religious friend.
And I'm going to miss her very
much.
ALEXIS COX: Gwen taught me that,
as a woman
in a challenging profession, I
have a responsibility
to help other women succeed.
She also taught me to never
underestimate
the power of a great statement
necklace.
MEREDITH GARRETSON: That leopard
print is
business casual.
DAN SAGALYN: She always said, "I
like your
haircut," whenever I got a
haircut, and that
hair was really important.
CHARLIE IDE: I learned a lot
from Gwen professionally
and personally, but I also
learned how to
let off some steam.
And the best way to do it is to
give a good
uppercut to Bozo.
GLYNDA BATES: Gwen taught me
never to call
her Gwennie.
ROBERT MACNEIL: Many years ago,
at the dawn
of television, some radio
comedian said, it's
easy to make it on TV.
All you have to do is fake
sincerity.
Gwen Ifill never faked anything.
She was always entirely herself,
bold, assertive,
confident, professional, and
funny.
GWEN IFILL: Do you have an
opening for a backup
singer?
MELISSA ETHERIDGE, Musician:
Come on.
I think you should...
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: I'm just saying I
could do it.
ROBERT MACNEIL: She made her
career, as they
used to say in the commercial,
the old-fashioned
way.
She earned it on a road made far
tougher by
her being black.
GWEN IFILL: A footnote to this
story.
ROBERT MACNEIL: I feel that the
outpouring
of sympathy for her too-young
death shows
how vitally she connected with
the audience.
But it may also show, in this
time politically,
which feels like a world turned
upside down,
that she provides an emotional
outlet for
people who prize the diversity
of American
society and, in her career, a
symbol of the
values they want to hold on to.
ANNE DAVENPORT: What Gwen taught
me was grit,
grace and gratitude, what I call
the three
G's.
We were doing her last stand-up
at the African
American Museum, and she
basically motored
through it, and she did what I
call, she chose
happy.
GWEN IFILL: This is an amazing
place, chockful
of the expected and the
unexpected.
ANNE DAVENPORT: She always saw
the bright
spot, even when she wasn't
feeling well towards
the end.
GWEN IFILL: I love it.
ANNE DAVENPORT: And also a kind
of fun lesson,
on the road, whether it was the
New Hampshire
primary or something else, bring
red wine
and Twizzlers.
MARGE HUBBARD: Gwen taught me,
put hot sauce
on my eggs.
EMILY CARPEAUX: Gwen taught me
to pave my
own way.
RICHARD COOLIDGE: To understand
people, it's
not just having empathy that's
enough, but
it's really to put yourself
inside their situation,
to understand what they were
going through.
LES CRYSTAL: The sweet spot for
Gwen was covering
politics.
And we know it was very
difficult for her
giving that up as she battled
her illness
in the last weeks.
We will also remember Gwen for
that beautiful
wide smile, along with her
devotion to high
standards of journalism, made
her a very special
colleague and friend.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Part of what
Gwen taught
me -- and this was from watching
her at the
2004 vice presidential debate
that she moderated
with Cheney and Edwards -- and
she raised
the question of the startling
high rate of
HIV among black women in
America.
GWEN IFILL: What should the
government's role
be in helping to end the growth
of this epidemic?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Neither of
them had any
idea what she was talking about.
And what Gwen taught me in that
moment was
that bringing uncomfortable
truths and facts
to people in power is what a
journalist is
supposed to do.
P.J. TOBIA: Gwen taught me that
you can always
find some kind of diversity, a
woman or a
person of color, to speak on
almost any issue,
if you just make enough phone
calls.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Gwen taught me
that you shouldn't
only tell a story with a
critical eye; you
should want your audience to
care.
JAY NEVEL: There could be a
special relationship
between an anchor, reporter and
her crew.
And whether it was here at WETA
studios or
whether we were on the road
doing the "Washington
Week" show or at the
conventions, she took
care of us, and we took care of
her.
SARA JUST: Gwen was a huge fan
of the show
"Hamilton."
And there's a line from
"Hamilton" that I
can't stop thinking about in the
days since
her death.
It says, "Legacy, what is a
legacy?
It is planting seeds in a garden
you never
get to see."
There's a huge, gaping hole in
our newsroom
and in the industry of
journalism in general
without Gwen.
She was one of a kind.
But she also planted a lot of
seeds.
She was a mentor, a guide, a
friend to a whole
slew of younger journalists.
She made time in her busy
schedule to offer
advice, be a sounding board, a
cheerleader,
an ally.
ELIZABETH SUMMERS: Gwen taught
me to trust
myself.
RHANA NATOUR: How to be graceful
under pressure.
JUSTIN SCUILETTI: Gwen taught me
not only
to strive to be good at your
job, but also
to have fun with it.
BILL BARBER: She is not going to
be replaced.
She will be in our hearts
forever.
JEFFREY BROWN: For years, Gwen
and I had lunch
or dinner nearly every week, a
chance to get
out of the office and talk.
At a certain point, we realized
we had developed
a pattern.
One of us would start with some
problem or
minor grievance, something at
work or too
much work or something like
that.
The other would listen, go along
with it a
bit, and point out how petty the
complaint
was, and get us to where we
always ended up
in those conversations: how
lucky we are to
do what we do.
We took turns doing that for
each other.
I know she did it for me.
It's my turn here, even in great
sadness,
to say how lucky I am to have
known and worked
with my friend Gwen Ifill.
JOE CAMP: I always had this sort
of Eddie
Haskell kind of thing with Gwen.
I would say, "Good evening, Ms.
Ifill," and,
"Good night, Ms. Ifill."
And I'm not going to say,
goodbye, Ms. Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Gwen lives on
through everyone
you just heard and so many more.
And we have one more tribute to
Gwen online.
Our beloved friend and colleague
was such
a force that a full moon, the
supermoon, drew
closer to Earth on her last day
of life.
Please, tonight, tune in for a
special "Washington
Week."
It's later on this evening.
Gwen's dear friend Michele
Norris leads a
panel of those who knew Gwen
well.
On "PBS NewsHour" Saturday: As
Iraqi Kurds
continue the fight against ISIS
in Mosul,
some on the front lines are also
hoping to
win their independence.
And, finally, before we go, we
want to take
a moment to celebrate a woman
very special
to us at the "NewsHour," Marge
Hubbard, as
she embarks on a new adventure.
For 15 years, Marge has been our
makeup artist,
looking -- making all of us look
good every
night.
Marge is off to spend more time
with her family,
including the holidays with her
grandchildren.
Best of luck to you, Marge, and
thank-yous
overflowing.
We know you are going to keep in
touch.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
A lot of goodbyes.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.